The Baikonour Cosmodrome
located in the middle of the
deserted steppes of Kazakhstan
is the Russian space launch facility
used to start the journey towards
the International Space Station
It is a huge complex that comprises
several technical buildings:
some for assembling
and preparing the rockets
and others to accommodate  the technicians
engineers and the crews
It was from Baikonur that Yuri Gagarin
began his extraordinary journey
around the Earth
more than 50 years ago!
Today every launch of the Soyuz vehicle
brings three new crew members
onboard the International Space Station
They prepare for their mission in Star City
the training centre of the cosmonauts
located near Moscow
Before stepping onto the launch pad
all the crew members have to undergo
hundreds of training hours
both theoretical and practical to be able
to operate and control
the Soyuz spacecraft
in any situation
The practical part of the training
makes use of realistic models
of the spacecraft that allow
the cosmonauts to feel almost as
if they were in a real situation
They all follow the path of many others
who flew before them from Baikonour
Let's discover how a Soyuz rocket works
The rocket has a total length
of approximately 50 m
and a diameter of up to 10 m
The total mass is about 310 tons
It consists of 3 parts called stages
A mixture of kerosene
and liquid oxygen
is used in order to generate
the required propulsion
On top of the rocket stands
the Soyuz spacecraft itself
encapsulated within the structure
of the rocket's nose
On the launch pad    four green arms
ensure that the rocket
is positioned properly
before lift-off
The arms will mechanically rotate away
to release the rocket while
it leaves the ground
The training being successfully completed
the crew members
are ready for the launch
and the rocket stands
on the launch pad
Two and a half hours
before lift-off
the crew finally enter the spacecraft
and start preparing it for the launch
in collaboration with
the ground controllers
They are now set for the launch
The cosmonauts are now sitting on top
of 300 tons of propellant
What happens if anything
goes wrong?
The Soyuz rocket is equipped
with a robust and powerful system
designed to save the crew
in case the rocket were
to start burning
or explode on the launch pad:
this is the
launch escape tower
The launch escape tower is itself
a small yet powerful rocket
made up of several engines
which use solid propellant
It is capable of quickly extracting
the crew compartments from
the rest of the rocket
in case of an imminent
threat to the crew
like an explosion for instance.
The mechanism may be
triggered automatically
or upon command from
the ground controllers
On only one occasion in the history
of Russian cosmonautics was
this escape system put to use
In September 1983
while the rocket was ready to lift-off
to bring two Soviet cosmonauts
to the Salyut 7 station
a valve failed to close
just 90 seconds before
final ignition
causing kerosene to spill onto the pad
and ignite
Fortunately, it was quickly realized
that the crew was endangered
and the ground controllers
activated the escape system
Explosive bolts fired
to separate the crew compartments
from the rest of the spacecraft
and the escape motor fired
dragging the crew compartments
free of the boosters
Although the two crew members
experienced an acceleration
of 14 to 17 g for 5 seconds
they  landed safely onboard
their capsule some 4 kilometres
away from the launch pad
The g-load is a
common way to express
the acceleration or in
other words the force
that the crew may feel
during changes in velocity.
The two cosmonauts
Strekalov and Titov
would go on to fly several
highly successful missions
in later years
This incident proved
how reliable the launch
escape system really is
Let's go through the
launch sequence now
At T-:00 We have lift-off
Full thrust is provided
by the 4 side boosters
and the central block
of the rocket
The core block is ignited at
the same time as the 4 boosters
to provide an additional thrust
The rocket then initiates a manoeuvre
called the pitch manoeuvre
to get the proper orientation
towards the desired orbit
The acceleration on the crew members
starts to slowly increase to 1.5 g
45 seconds later
the rocket has already
reached an altitude of 11 km
and a velocity of 1,640 km/h
This is the moment the rocket
must withstand the maximum
pressure on its structure
The cosmonauts feel twice
their normal weight on the ground
Looking at the projection
of the track on the ground
we can observe that the rocket has
already crossed 16 km.
After almost two minutes into the
flight
the rocket is at an altitude
of more than 40 km
high enough to get rid
of the launch escape tower.
A few seconds later
the four strap-on boosters
stop firing having consumed
all the propellant they contained
Being of no use now
they are jettisoned
from the main core
which continues to fire
and is now called
the second stage
In case of a severe malfunction
at this point
the spacecraft can still separate
from the rest of the rocket
and come back safely to the ground
without the need for
additional propulsion
The debris follow a trajectory
that leads it to hit the ground
in an uninhabited area located
more than 350 km from
the launch pad
Soon the crew members will
experience the maximum acceleration
on their bodies
3.5 times their own weight
but only for a few seconds
This is the most physically
demanding moment for
the cosmonauts
In the meantime
the second stage continues
to fire for 3 more minutes
The structure that protects the spacecraft
is then jettisoned
Once again the debris
will follow a safe trajectory
to hit the ground 530 km
away from the launch site
The spacecraft is now
fully exposed to space
The light from outside
can now enter the crew compartment
through the small windows
It's now been approximately
5 minutes since lift-off
Two seconds before the extinction of the second stage
the third stage is ignited
then the second stage separates
from the rest of the rocket
The engine of the third stage
will continue firing
for the next 4 minutes
As with the 4 boosters
the second stage
follows a safe trajectory
down to Earth
The rocket is already at an altitude of 170 km
and travelling at a velocity
of 13,250 km/h
Then the circular section that
links the second stage
with the third stage is jettisoned
while the rocket goes on to reach
the targeted orbit
around 220 km above
the surface of the Earth
Once on the desired orbit
approximately 9 minutes
into the launch
the last engine is cut-off
The spacecraft finally
separates from the rocket
the cosmonauts can now feel
the microgravity
Moments later the antennas
and the solar arrays are deployed
The spacecraft
is now on its way to the
International Space Station